CONVERGENCE WITH RESPECT TO THE GRID: THE MESH-CUTOFF
  
 
The purpose of this exercise is to see the importance of the
MeshCutoff parameter, which determines the fineness of the real space
grid on which some of the integrals are computed. In particular, we
will see:

- how the properties of your system are affected by the MeshCutoff
  value, and

- how to get a good MeshCutoff value.
 
We will use the Methane (CH4) molecule.
 
 
1) Signs of an insufficient MeshCutoff
 
Check the input file named ch4-0.fdf in directory mesh-30ry
 
The system is a methane molecule, inside a cubic cell of 10 Ang
side. The carbon atom is localized at the origin.
 
Now, look for the the mesh cutoff chosen in the input file. Run SIESTA
with this input file, using the pseudopotential file C.ps located in
the directory Pseudos
 
Read the output, paying special attention to:
 
The mesh used in the calculation (look for the line starting with:
InitMesh: MESH = ) Total energy Max atomic force Total CPU execution
time
 
Can you calculate what is the distance between mesh points?
 
Now, we do a small displacement in the position of the molecule inside
our "box". With SIESTA, you can do a rigid translation of the system,
by using the input block:
 
%block AtomicCoordinatesOrigin x y z %endblock AtomicCoordinatesOrigin
 
This is done in the input file ch4-d.fdf, which is exactly the same as
the former one (ch4-0.fdf) but with a rigid translation of
(0.127,0.745,-0.33) Ang.
 
 
Run again SIESTA using this new input file. Analyze your output file
and compare with the former. Do you see anything strange? You should
notice some signs that tell you that the MeshCutoff that has been used
is too small for this system.
 
 
2) The “eggbox effect”
 
We will now do a series of calculations to see the so-called 'eggbox'
effect.  Go to directory egg and use the input file ch4.fdf. We will
plot a profile of the total energy as a function of the displacement
of the molecule with respect to the mesh, by displacing it in small
steps in the x direction. The eggbox (as a function of the
displacement of the molecule) will be periodic, with a period that
correspond to the distance between meshpoints (why?).
 
Do a few (say, about ten) calculations to see one of these
periods. How much to you need to displace the molecule? Of course,
this depends on the spacing between mesh points, which you should have
calculated before.
 
Plot the total energy and the total force versus the displacement of
the molecule. You should be able to reproduce the results shown in
egg/Out/e.ps.
 
Why are the properties of the molecule changing so much with this
translation? Of course, the answer is that the meshcutoff is not
sufficiently large for this system, and therefore the integrals are
not converged, producing a variation of the results when the position
of the grid changes with respect to the atomic positions.
 
 
3) Finding the right MeshCutoff.
 
Go to the directory mesh-cutoff. Use the ch4.fdf input file, and the
same pseudopotential file as before.
 
Do a series of calcualtions increasing the value of the MeshCutoff
parameter, by steps of 10 Ry.  From the output files, extract:
 
The actual MeshCutoff used (which is usually different from the one
required in the input file!)  The total energy The total force The CPU
time
 
Plot the total energy and total force versus the requested meshcutoff
and the used meshcutoff. Try to decide what would be a reasonable
value for a real calculation in this system.
 
An important issue: realize how the total time of your calculation has
grown with the increment of MeshCutoff value. Always take this into
account, in trying to reach a compromise between accuracy and
computational time.
 
You have plots with the results that you should obtain in
mesh-cutoff/Out
 
Once that you have chosen a meshcutoff whith you consider as
converged, you can again plot the eggbox effect. (Notice that the mesh
spacing has now changed!).
 
 
4) Effect of the inclussion of Core Corrections in the
   Pseudopotential.
 
Core corrections often make convergence with the MeshCutoff slower. As
a matter of example, we will do the same calculation as before, but
using a C pseudopotential that has a large core correction term (note
that this is not necessary for C, but we do it as a matter of
example).
 
Go to directory core. In file core.ps you can see the valence charge
and the core correction included in the pseudopotential. You have the
pseudopotential file in C.pe.psf. Note that we have included a very
hard core correction, just as a matter of illustration.
 
Do similar tests as you did in Section 3. See how the convergence of
the total energies and forces change with the inclusion of this large
core correction.
 
You have plots with the results that you should obtain in core/Out.
